SOURCE: Fer, spoken rant, 2026-09-01. Dictated / transcribed.
STATUS: Verbatim. Untouched. Do not edit this file, ever.
Cleaned capture: capture/2026-09-01-abundance-is-conditional.md

---

I'm starting a new, um, idea, flow here after thinking a lot about the conversations that are happening in the, um, Moonshot podcast. And, I think it's a lot of these podcasts, they're talking about abundance, and just at a high level, um, what comes to mind to me is that, Yes, every time they say, hey, what should we do? Like, what does abundance really look like? How do we transition to it? How do we minimise the issues that are going to come from the path to get there? Because we really do want to have this world of abundance, right? But, but, There's still a lot of doubts around what we're going to do to get there and how, How we can overcome all the fears that exist around AI. When they talk about abundance for everyone. I've been given it a long thought, and what really, what I'd really like to think about is, it's not that everyone can have anything, right? Or, or access everything, or fulfil all their dreams, right? Um, I was trying to think about what that future of tomorrow looks like. And we talk about, from a, from one of the things that they will call, they call out consistently is the end, it's, the future is for entrepreneurs, right? But not everyone's an interpreter. There's long discussions around that. But the point is, They talk about, and this is a pilot, I think is a lot more interesting. They talk about extreme agency, right? You will be able to do anything, right? Uh, or you will be able to access anything. And I think this is, there starts to be a pattern there, which is what I would like to explore, because what I'm hearing is, Um, You can do filling the blank. You can learn, fill in the blank. You will be able to cure fill in the blank. You will be able to discover, fill in the bank, right? And it really comes to a point where what we're saying is, the structure of that future is, Everyone can, A verb, do something. And then, Fill in the blank. So it's verb and fill in the blank, you can do anything you can think of, right? And within that structure, that all sounds great because it's a world of promise and it sounds awesome. Ah, so I can learn Chinese. I can learn how to swim. I can learn how to roller skate. All those things are all well and fine. But. Um, I think there's, there's, a very strong aspect of what we're not hearing the moon car, the moonshot, um, podcast mates. Talk about it. This is something that I would like to write, a bit of a dissertation of that, right? And actually ask them to dig it into it. And it's the fact that in this pattern of verb plus fill in the blank. There's actually, A corollary to it. There's a, there's a, there's a part that follows, and this is the part that's really the most interesting and where I think a lot of the conversation really gets stuck. And it's that it should be verb plus fit in the blank. Plus, if, right, we live in a world of conditions. For example, today, you can buy anything. But buy a Zivo, anything is literally anything. If. And here's the conditions, if you have enough money. For example, or if there is stock available, or if, uh, you have the money and you have the stock available, and you're close enough to the stock, then you can actually put your hands on it. Or there is a supply chain that can actually get it to you, right? All these conditions need to be met. Additionally, depending on where you live, there might be additional conditions, so very well, if it isn't legal. Uh, where you live, or Um, If you're old enough, right? So it's legal for your age range, uh, or if it's, um, Yeah, like if you've passed, I don't know what, a particular test that allows you, you have a certificate that allows you to have that in your position. Think about guns in Spain, for example. Um, so there's there's a lot of these conditions that there is really where the matter comes into play. The really interesting matter comes into play because, When we talk about a world of abundance. What they're talking about, and you hear Elon must talk about sometimes, and you hear people say, well, money won't matter. You hear it in modern Must talk about this too, right? Money won't matter. The future economy in the future economy, money won't matter. We'll have to reset the money somehow, right? Um, Musk says the same thing. Everyone will have high basic income, right? And working will be optional. Well, if you take that away, then, that biggest conditional that right now we live our lives upon, right? where we can do things if we have access to the financial resources to be able to do those things or to acquire those things, right? A financial resource is really, really important for us to be part of that action, like verb plus pin of the blank. If we don't have money, we can't do these things. And it's very hard for people to grasp a world where there's no money. So we need to gradually find a way for people to continue to participate in the economy. Right? With a token of exchange. But we have to acknowledge that that condition is there, right? The 2nd part, which is really interesting, is that we have to look in the in the eyes, right? The fact that there's many other conditions that are country based, government based, right? And you hear the moonshot mates talk a little about, um, You know, America. winning the AI race, right? And, and careful with China. We need to compete with China. We need to beat China. The reality is that, If we retain these countries, the countries will continue to impose their own ifs, as the technology disperses around the world, right? China has electric vehicles, America has electric vehicles. Europe has electric vehicles, but they all have them under their own ifs, under their own conditions. The technology will continue to disperse, same as AI right now as across the entire world, but the use of it or the value of it falls within the conditions of what those countries allowed to be done with it, right? That same thing will continue to happen. So each of the ifs will continue to be located to a particular country, until the country's disappear. And countries are not going to disappear anytime soon. Right? That's going to take a fair bit of time in the transition, right? We'll have to start with some sort of, I don't know, exodus from Earth. Maybe we have to start new and we'll start new countries, right? With our same if conditions, um, on the moon or on Mars, right? But then we still talk and start talking about those parts of the equation, then we can really start to understand how potential we can transition to this world, right? Um, the financial aspect of The if we have financial resources, that's a very interesting one, right? Because, In in the economy. People need to have uh, Money to able to be able to participate in it, right? If AI and robotics take over uh labour, Humans stop having an income, they stop having an income, they stop having a resource that allows them to fulfil the uh, ability to do things. As I was saying, in order to have people participate in the economy, they will need to have access to money, right? Um, if they don't work. Well, They lack the resource that they need to actually participate in the exchange of goods, in a world where goods requires under that condition, right? That, um, money is given in exchange for goods. Um, So you could say, well, if we give everything for free, they don't need to, um, to have money. Which doesn't make any sense to me, right? There's always going to be some sort of value attributed to things, right? Not everything, um, is worth nothing. At least we're not going to be there in any time soon. Um, Also, the groups of people and companies, right? that come together to actually offer these services and goods, right? Um, they will do so in exchange for something. Um, so we have to assume that there's still going to be some coin of trade in order to be able to obtain. Uh, things, be it knowledge or services or what have you, right? Even if you were, let's say, given a ration system, right? The rationing is still based on some sort of token. that you get on a regular basis, right? Um, so let's work into the assumption that money is still around, right? Um, Under the premise that money is still around. Money is given to people who, um, produce something of value to someone, right? So people need to be producing something in order to get money, right? Um, Either that or there's a flow of money. So in a world where people don't work. But money still needs to flow, there needs to be some sort of input of money for them in order to be able to continue to participate in the igma economy, and therefore, have the money flow back into the businesses. That produce services and goods. Now, once the money reaches these companies, where the services and goods are produced, we could fall in the trap of saying, well, it will flow back to the people through governments and taxes. Um, that makes no sense to me. Uh, I don't think tax is a reasonable way for the goods and services to then flow through the government and then back to the people. Uh, So if we think, okay, let's let's live in a, in a country, let's say, position ourselves in a country where tax is held stable, 10%, you pay what you pay, and that funds the government and whatever the government manages. But it's the companies that actually have the leverage. Companies. Otherwise, I have a lot of the final resource, right? They have the resource for exchange, which is the money ends up flying to the company's bank accounts. There is a fear that there's going to be a very high centralisation of power, right, to a very few. So we're going to have very few people, harnessing a vast, vast majority of the world's economic power. There's going to be very few that are very, very rich. Now, This is this is obviously problematic. Um, Because if they hold the money, How do they make it flow back to everyone else, right? And we've got to go to position ourselves in a world where, I don't know, 20, 30, 40% of the population, over the course of a few years, starts losing, productive value when contrasted with technology. And the technology's ability to produce the same value for a lot, less. much faster and with higher quality. There's so many things we could have these people do. right? Um, We could have them, um, running courses for others, like smaller services that have, let's say, no productive value from a producing goods perspectives. So we just expand the services we offer, one another, so you can think. Um, health, uh, and, um, training sessions, right? So group training sessions, we have humans training humans, right? So we have specialists in group training and personal trainers. Um, we have, um, Sexual exchanges and company, right? Uh, services we have, um, entertainment, so theatre. Yeah, music, right? All the all the arts that produce well-being, right? We produce human, human well-being and sensations, right? physical and emotional well-being. Those will be the, let's say, services that we can imagine. Uh, many people could be paid for. Um, Now, of course, they have to be paid for. And the people who attend these uh, to enjoy these need to have something to pay with, right? So we're going back to. Well, what would they pay with if they don't have any money? And these are, of course, secondary in their Maslow pyramid, they 1st have to pay their house. They 1st have to pay their loans. They 1st have to pay their children's education, their health. Even if we solve all cures, we're going to have to pay for health, right? So, uh, going back to the analogy of the formula formulas, I will be able to heal all my pains. If I have the resources. Monetary to require those like request those services and have access to those cures, and I live in a country where they are legal, and where they are produced, and they are made available to me at a price that's affordable to my pocket. All those conditions need to be met. So, We end up going back to the fact that if money accrues to very large enterprises, and having the company being massively taxed by governments in order to have the money flow back into the economy, for just for the sake of, as a human right, right, in order to be able to participate in this, abundant, abundantly productive system that doesn't require humans to produce those goods. The companies need to be the ones that start promoting, that their money flows back to their consumers. Now they can do that in 2 ways. They can follow the mechanisms, for example, that we have seen in countries like Belgium, where, um, you go to a hospital, and they make it very clear to you how much it costs to pay, uh, the hospital services and you pay them, and then you go back to your, um, local uh, social services and they pay you back. So yeah, you make the money flow through the system. Um, ultimately the users don't have a cost. But they are well aware of how much things cost. Um, Or at least the value that we can attribute to certain things so that they have a good reference of contrast. Or you can go the other path, like Spain, for example, where you go to a hospital and you don't pay anything. Um, and everything is free from a consumer's perspective. After having paid tax to sustain the system, of course. Um, Now, of course, you've got cases where you need that insurance, I say, you're a Belgian, you don't have the money. You still get the service, right? And you can see on the bill how much it would have cost you if you would have been able to pay it. Um, The money has to flow out of those companies. And those companies then have a very interesting choice, and I think that's where we really should focus on. We shouldn't be talking about what the government should do, right? I hear the moonshot mate is talking. What should go on those two? No, no, no, no. This is a, what should, what should these huge businesses do, right? Let's talk about a business that makes a 1000000000 a day, like in video, 2000000000 a day, like Google, right? What should they be doing with that cash flow, right? They have to sustain the cost of their services. Okay? If the cost of running their services. is reduced over time, right? Thanks to automation and cheaper energy production and cheaper chip production and um, maintenance of the overall systems, um, mechanical systems, production systems, um, material extraction, et cetera. Great. Right. They'll have more profits. On their balance sheet. Ultimately, we're talking about, what do they do with their profits? We want them to sustain those services because that is the foundation of the actual value of abundance that we're going towards, right? So those services need to be sustained. And so we accept that as society, that the investment to sustain it remains. So we only look at the profit balance sheet. Um, that, of course, includes the employees, uh, cost. While they have employees. Um, Once you look at the profits. Now, the question is, what should those companies be doing with those 1000000000s and 1000000000s of profits? And If the only thing about one company, then maybe that's, That's not enough. But if you think about the top 5, like the S&P 500, right? And you put a collective of all their profits on the table. Obviously, each one of these companies looked at in isolation, they're going to have their own, um, Investment pads. You talk with them, they're going to say, well, we're going to reinvest these profits into expanding our business and to improving our services even more and breaking the frontier, right? So the money can't go back to the consumers just yet. Right? Although that's under the way of they could frame it is we are sending the money back to society by giving new people jobs, right? We're going to start new businesses. We're going to start new, um, avenues of investment where we're going to be expanding our business by building more data centres. We're creating jobs, by building new energy, power plants, build, giving people more jobs, right? Um, so they could always say that they're bringing back the money to the economy through offering new roles. At least for now, and sometimes that might disappear, right? Um, Or that they could be lowering the cost of their their products. Um, by still offering the services, but charging less because they're more efficient in their in their process. I think really that is the big discussion that needs to be had. Um, how much money? Can accompany a crew? And if you think about it from an owner's perspective, right? How much money can one person accrue? And this, of course, this opens the door to socialist discussions, right? Um, That money is well earned by the founders of a massive business, right? It's theirs by right. Should you be able to take it away? should be able should someone be able to cap? How much money someone owns? Um, by extension, how much access they have to wealth. Um, is there a limit after which, It's, like, for example, I, I, I just put my, I'm part of the, let's say, Middle upper class, well-placed person, but I don't have access to endless luxuries, right? I do have to work every day. I do, I can't retire whenever I want to hypothetically, right? But, I imagine there is a threshold. Like, I can put a threshold in my mind through which I would be able to not need to work the rest of my life if I didn't want to, right? Um, and there's. That could be very much the edge that we can start talking about. So for example, when Elon Musk says, working will be optional, right? That is already the case for a very small subset. of humanity. Right? Because they already have accrued so much wealth. That even the wealth itself. If they did nothing with it, would, uh, continue to generate value. And even if they just put it bluntly in a bank account, and considered for inflation for the next 100 years, right? Living a, an above average lifestyle, They'd still not run out, right? So how much? is enough for someone to own in order to make working optional. Maybe that is a threshold that we should be talking about because if we can expand the number of people that live in that threshold today. Right? We can gradually expand the number of people that can live in that world. Um, Now those people Should, in principle, be the ones that lose their job, right? So if you're going to lose your job in the next three, 5 years, and you're going to be completely replaced, um, and we're going to be moving to a world where you don't need to work, right? You should at least have enough. Money to sustain you for the rest of your life so that you don't have to work if you don't want to, right? Um, And this now opens another completely different door, which is what is the base life quality of life that that would imply, right? Because it's too easy to say. Oh, you can have anything. No, no one can have anything. Right? Everything is limited. Materials are limited. Atoms are limited. Um, access to energy is limited, and it will continue to be limited for many years, um, Computers limited. Time, Time is very limited. Even if we start queueing everything. The number of cures available will be limited. Um, the number of drinks distilled will be limited. The number of bottles of Cabernet, Sauvignon, of a special reserve of, I don't know, 1520 years ago, will be limited. You can't you can't make more of those. Um, So defining the thresholds of what a good lifestyle is for humanity as a whole. I mean, that's close to impossible, right? Um, If we assume that companies will continue to try to remain competitive and be competitive, hence reinvesting their own profits into themselves and into their markets to continue to improve and not lose traction against others because generating money for the future to be sustainable in the long run is still a hard requirement of the conditions of Uh, that the, uh, company, organisation, like the business that produce goods and services work under, right? A company can be, can produce anything. For as long as they want as long as they can seem to have customers that pay them for it, right? And they continue to have supply chains that supply them the innovations and the products that they need to offer those services and products. They're still conditions, right? And a lot of those conditions also like one of the big conditions is they will continue to have those customers. If, There's nothing better in the market. Right? And if they continue to innovate and they continue to offer the solution that their customers require in the modern times that they live in. Or whatever times that they live in. If that condition isn't met, that company will die. And the profits will move someplace else. Because that's where people will continue to invest their time and get their value from. In short, Abundance sounds great, but everything is conditioned. conditions are vastly defined by national governments and civilisation rules, uh, around within geographic boundaries that we've defined over the years and years. Um, and within all those boundaries, there is a condition of token of exchange. Um, That token of exchange will continue to live. And... We kind of, we can't assume that it's going to go anytime soon, because it is the foundation on which the companies that offer services and products for the abundance to exist. And it is the foundation on which they rely on to understand if they can continue off in those services or not, if they continue to compete, and get the best talent and get the best services and get the energy. Um, They require in order to continue to offer that. We don't live in a globalised world under a single nation where humanity is understood to be one. We still see a lot of separation between nations and we hear that from a competitive standpoint, again, going back to our lovely moonshot mates. We have to be China. We have to beat China. We hear them say that again and again and again. I'm far from hearing them uniting forces on a humanity standard, or even trying. People need to be part of the economy. They need to continue accessing the resources that they need in order to fulfil the exchange and the participation conditions to be able to attain that abundance. In order to do that, those that accrue the resources required need to make those flow. in a way that fulfils any condition those humans might be in. Including being displaced from their work. Does that mean we need UBI? I don't think so. Maybe we need, um, We need these huge companies to actually start service businesses where they offer services for free. So, I don't know, maybe we have the Tesla gyms, right? And the SpaceX theatres, and I don't know, the open AI, movie making industry, and the Claude medical services, and all of these are fear of charge for everyone, anyone in the world, anywhere in the world. Um, That's the way that we can actually attain, uh, a means of having everyone be able to participate in the economy by bringing, truly bringing service down to 0 cost. But there has to be a choice made by the enterprises, not by the government. The enterprises are going to be waiting for the governments to make their choice for them. Well, they fight to remain competitive between them, then we're in a deadlock. Um, You've got the resources, you've got to make the choice, and the resources accrue to you, you've got to make the choice. You can't be the naughty kid that keeps everything to themselves until the parent comes along and says, you're hugging, stop hogging the ball, share it.
